Three Short
Novels
Edited by
Angela Esterhammer
Edinburgh Edition of the Works of
Glenfell
Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore
The Omen

[FIGURE 1 (p1)] [FIGURE 2 (p1)]

Three Short Novels
Glenfell
Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore
The Omen
The Edinburgh Edition of the Works of John Galt
General Editor: Angela Esterhammer

The Edinburgh Edition of the Works of John Galt
General Editor: 
Angela Esterhammer (University of Toronto)
Editorial Board: 
Gerard Carruthers (University of Glasgow)
Ian Duncan (University of California, Berkeley)
Penny Fielding (University of Edinburgh)
Suzanne Gilbert (University of Stirling)
Regina Hewitt (University of South Florida)
Alison Lumsden (University of Aberdeen)
Katie Trumpener (Yale University)
Published so far:
Annals of the Parish, edited by Robert P. Irvine
Three Short Novels: Glenfell; Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore;
The Omen, edited by Angela Esterhammer
In preparation:
Sir Andrew Wylie, of that Ilk, edited by Sharon Alker
The Provost, edited by Caroline McCracken-Flesher
The Entail, edited by Mark Schoenfield and Clare Simmons
The Ayrshire Legatees and The Steam-Boat, edited by Mark Parker
Lawrie Todd, edited by Regina Hewitt
Bogle Corbet, edited by Katie Trumpener

JOHN GALT
Three Short Novels
Glenfell
Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore
The Omen
Edited by Angela Esterhammer
edinburgh university press
2020

Edinburgh University Press is one of the leading university presses in the UK. 
We publish academic books and journals in our selected subject areas across 
the humanities and social sciences, combining cutting-edge scholarship with 
high editorial and production values to produce academic works of lasting 
importance. 
For more information visit our website: edinburghuniversitypress.com 
© editorial matter and organization, Angela Esterhammer, 2020
© the text, Edinburgh University Press, 2020
Edinburgh University Press Ltd 
The Tun – Holyrood Road 
12 (2f) Jackson’s Entry 
Edinburgh EH8 8PJ
Typeset in Arno Pro at the University of Toronto
and printed and bound in Great Britain
A CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
ISBN  978 1 4744 0208 8 (hardback)
ISBN  978 1 4744 0209 5 (webready PDF)
ISBN  978 1 4744 0210 1 (epub)
The right of Angela Esterhammer to be identified as author of the editorial 
matter has been asserted in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and 
­Patents Act 1988 and the Copyright and Related Rights Regulations 2003 (SI 
No. 2498).

CONTENTS
Preface to The Works of John Galt.     .      .      .      .      .  	 vii
Acknowledgements.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .   	
ix
Chronology of John Galt.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .     	
x
Introduction.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .    	 xv
The Periodical Novelist or Circulating Library.     .      	
1
Advertisement to the Series.     .      .      .      .      .     	
2
Vol. 1: Glenfell; or, Macdonalds and Campbells.     .   	
5
Preface.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .  	
6
Glenfell.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .  	
7
Vol. 3: Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore.     .      .    	 134
Biographical Sketch of the Abbate Furbo.     .    	 138
Andrew of Padua.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .   	 141
The Omen.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .    	 225
Emendations.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .   	 297
End-of-line Hyphens.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      	 301
Explanatory Notes.     .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .      .     	 303

PREFACE TO THE EDINBURGH EDITION OF 
THE WORKS OF JOHN GALT
John Galt was among the most popular and prolific Scottish writers 
of the nineteenth century. He wrote in a panoply of forms and genres 
about a great variety of topics and settings, drawing on his experiences 
of living, working, and travelling in Scotland and England, in Europe 
and the Mediterranean, and in North America. Yet only a fraction of 
his many works have been reprinted since their original publication. 
In 1841–43 Galt’s most important publisher, Blackwood, reprinted 
seven of his novels in volumes 1, 2, 4, and 6 of the Blackwood’s Standard 
Novels series. In 1895, the Blackwood firm republished these novels, 
with one change to the selection, as the eight-volume Works of John 
Galt; this collection was reissued in 1936, again with one additional 
novel. Modern annotated editions of some individual works have 
appeared since then. However, the Edinburgh Edition of the Works of 
John Galt presents for the first time a much fuller range of Galt’s fiction 
in authoritative texts, together with materials that add to an appre­
ciation of his historical surroundings and his cultural heritage. Each 
volume includes an introduction that places Galt’s work in the con­
text of history, genre, and the print culture of the period; annotations 
that explain specialized vocabulary as well as historical, geographical, 
literary, cultural, and philosophical allusions; and other features such 
as a glossary of Scots words and expressions, maps, and excerpts that 
illuminate Galt’s sources and his contemporary reception.
Galt wrote and published his work quickly, sending portions of 
manuscript to the printer to be set in type as soon as he finished them; 
he and his publisher would frequently correct proofs of part of a text 
while he continued writing the remainder. Although he was usually 
busy with several projects at once, his correspondence documents his 
involvement in all stages of the publication process and shows that he 
undertook proof-corrections himself, except in cases where he devel­
oped especially close working relationships with a publisher or fellow 
writer and allowed that person editorial control. However, with few 
exceptions, no manuscripts or proofs of Galt’s published fiction have 
survived. For many of his works, only a single edition appeared during

his lifetime. Sometimes there were one or more ­further editions, lightly 
revised and corrected; in other cases, the text was originally published 
in a periodical and then revised for publication in book form. As a 
general editorial principle, subject to adaptation based on research 
by the editors and the particular publishing history of each text, the 
present edition adopts as the copy-text the latest version in which 
Galt is known to have had a hand. In the case of texts first published 
in periodicals and later revised by Galt to appear as a book, the book 
publication is preferred as the copy-text. Each volume of the present 
edition includes the editor’s account of the composition and publica­
tion history of Galt’s text, with reference to extant versions in the form 
of periodical publications, multiple book editions, and manuscript 
materials. All editorial emendations to the copy-text are recorded in a 
list of emendations at the end of the volume. The Edinburgh Edition of 
the Works of John Galt presents Galt’s fiction accurately as it appeared 
during his lifetime, reflecting his intentions to the extent that they can 
be ascertained. 
Galt’s work was thoroughly interwoven with the publishing prac­
tices and reading habits of his age. He wrote for currently popular 
publication venues such as monthly magazines and literary annuals; 
he acquiesced to the expected format of the three-volume novel, but 
also attempted to popularize alternative forms such as single-volume 
­novels and shorter fiction. His works therefore present a ­revealing 
­pic­ture of the literary marketplace during the second and third 
decades of the nineteenth century. The Edinburgh Edition of the Works 
of John Galt highlights these insights through the editors’ contextu­
alizing notes on early-nineteenth-century print culture and through 
the presentation of Galt’s texts on the page. With respect to page 
layout, font, punctuation, and many other details, this edition seeks 
to replicate the look of Galt’s original editions while providing an 
enjoyable reading experience for modern readers. The editors hope 
that the results will make Galt’s clever, insightful, multifaceted, often 
innovative fiction accessible to a wide range of readers and researchers, 
and reaffirm Galt’s importance within literary history.
preface
viii

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The production of this volume has been, in many respects, a team effort. 
Members of the Editorial Board, editors of other volumes of The Works 
of John Galt, the staff of Edinburgh University Press, and librarians in 
the United Kingdom and North America consistently responded to 
queries and requests with expert knowledge and good advice. Rob 
Dunbar, Ian Duncan, Penny Fielding, Robert P. Irvine, and Anthony 
Mandal, in particular, generously shared their expertise on a variety of 
topics relevant to this volume. Sincere thanks are due to my research 
assistants at the Uni­versity of Toronto. Delaney ­Anderson, ­Alexander 
De Pompa, David Johnstone, Ronan ­Mallovy, Sana Mohtadi, ­Tatiana 
Poluch, Zoe Sebastien, and Meg Zhang worked on this volume at 
many stages; Kaylee Baxter, John Kozub, and Jovana ­Pajovic pro­
vided extensive assistance in preparing and setting the final text. The 
University of Toronto gave generous financial support to this project 
and Victoria College contributed a congenial and productive working 
environment for the team. Thanks also to the McLaughlin Library at 
the University of Guelph for providing the original title-page images 
of Glenfell and The Omen, and to Harvard University Library for the 
title page of Andrew of Padua. 
Angela Esterhammer
Victoria College, University of Toronto

CHRONOLOGY OF JOHN GALT
1779
John Galt is born (2 May) at Irvine, Scotland, as the oldest child of John Galt 
(1750–1817), a ship’s captain involved in West Indian trade, and Jean Thomson 
(1746–1826). 
1787–88
Attends the Old Grammar School in Irvine.
1789 
Father becomes a ship-owner and moves the family to Greenock. Attends 
school in the Royal Close.
1795–1804
Clerk in Greenock Customs House, then in the mercantile office of James 
Miller & Co.
1797
Founds a literary and debating society with two former schoolfellows, 
William Spence and James Park.
1798
Death of brother James at Montego Bay (17 July).
1803
Publishes a memoir of Greenock poet John Wilson in John Leyden’s Scotish 
Descriptive Poems. Extracts from “Battle of Largs, a Gothic Poem” appear in 
the Scots Magazine (April 1803 and January 1804).
1804
Invites James Hogg to a public dinner in Greenock and meets him there. 
Moves to London (May). Publishes The Battle of Largs in book form, then 
suppresses it.
1805
“Essay on Commercial Policy” in the Philosophical Magazine, edited by 
Alexander Tilloch (November). Enters into business with Hugh McLachlan, 
factor and broker.

1807
“Statistical Account of Upper Canada” in the Philosophical Magazine (October). 
1808
Bankruptcy of the McLachlan-Galt business (April). Enters into business 
with brother Tom, who soon departs for Honduras.
1809
Admitted to Lincoln’s Inn to study law (18 May), but after four months 
embarks on travels in the Mediterranean and Near East, at times in the 
company of Lord Byron. Visits Gibraltar, Sardinia, Malta, Sicily, Albania, 
Greece, and Turkey; journeys overland between Constantinople and Vidin 
for the sake of a mercantile scheme that proves unsuccessful.
1811
Returns to London (October); abandons the study of law. 
1812 
Voyages and Travels in the Years 1809, 1810, and 1811; The Tragedies of Maddalen, 
Agamemnon, Lady Macbeth, Antonia, and Clytemnestra; The Life and Admini­
stration of Cardinal Wolsey, about which Galt receives a complimentary 
letter from Walter Scott. Briefly edits Redhead Yorke’s Weekly Political Review. 
Travels to Gibraltar to open a branch office for Kirkman Finlay & Co. (June), 
but the business falls through. 
1813 
Returns to London to seek medical treatment. Marries ­Elizabeth Tilloch (20 
April). Death of brother Tom in Honduras (2 August). ­Letters from the Levant; 
contributions to Lives of the Admirals. Last encounters with Byron.
1814
 “On the Art of Rising in the World” and “On the Principles of the Fine Arts” 
in the New Monthly Magazine. Edits and contributes dramas to The New 
British Theatre (4 vols, 1814–15). Visits France, Belgium, and Holland on a 
potential business venture (May). Birth of son John (13 August).
1815 
The Majolo (vol. 1). Birth of son Thomas (12 August). Becomes Secretary 
of the Royal Caledonian Asylum, a children’s charity established by the 
Highland Society in London. Death of friend William Spence.
1816
The Life and Studies of Benjamin West, Esq. (vol. 1); The Majolo (2 vols).
chronology
xi

1817
Death of father (6 August). Birth of son Alexander (6 September). Death 
of friend James Park. Begins writing for Richard Phillips’ Monthly Magazine.
1818
The Appeal: A Tragedy, in Three Acts performed at Edinburgh with prologue 
by J. G. Lockhart, epilogue by Walter Scott. Moves to Finnart near Greenock 
to work for Reid, Irving & Co., but the business venture is aborted.
1819
“The Late Mr. William Spence” in the Monthly Magazine (May). Returns to 
London to lobby Parliament as agent for the Edinburgh & Glasgow Union 
Canal Company. Begins writing school textbooks under pseudonyms for 
publishers Phillips and Souter, as well as children’s books including The 
History of Gog and Magog. Publishes occasional articles in Blackwood’s 
Edinburgh Magazine.
1820
Glenfell; Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore; Life, Studies, and Works of 
Benjamin West (2 vols); The Wandering Jew; All the Voyages round the World; 
A Tour of Europe; A Tour of Asia; The Earthquake; “The Atheniad, or The 
Rape of the Parthenon: An Epic Poem” in the Monthly Magazine (February); 
“The Ayrshire Legatees” in instalments in Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine 
(June 1820–February 1821). The Union Canal bill is successfully passed by 
Parliament. Appointed agent for claimants in Upper Canada (now Ontario) 
seeking compensation from the British government for losses sustained in 
the War of 1812. 
1821 
Annals of the Parish; Pictures, Historical and Biographical; The Ayrshire Legatees 
(in book form); “The Steam-Boat” in instalments in Blackwood’s Edinburgh 
Magazine (February–December). Resides in Edinburgh during the latter part 
of the year while writing for Blackwood.
1822
Sir Andrew Wylie, of that Ilk; The Provost; The Steam-Boat (in book form);
 “The Gathering of the West” in Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine (September); 
The Entail. Visits Scotland during the summer; in Edinburgh during the visit 
of George IV (August), then in Greenock; returns to London in December.
1823 
Ringan Gilhaize; The Spaewife. Moves his family from London to Musselburgh 
near Edinburgh.
chronology
xii

1824 
The Bachelor’s Wife; Rothelan. Forms the Canada Company to broker the sale 
of Crown lands and promote settlement in Upper Canada; appointed as its 
Secretary.
1825
Travels to York (now Toronto) via New York as one of five commissioners 
sent to Upper Canada on a fact-finding mission (January to June). Presented 
with the Freedom of the Burgh of Irvine. Death of father-in-law Alexander 
Tilloch. Travels to Scotland after his mother suffers a stroke (December).
1826
The Omen; The Last of the Lairds; “Bandana on Colonial Undertakings” 
and “Bandana on Emigration” in Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine (August–
September). Death of mother (18 July). Appointed Superintendent of the 
Canada Company, which is granted a royal charter (19 August). Embarks for 
New York (October); reaches York in Upper Canada (12 December). Studies 
the operations of land companies in upper New York State. 
1827 
Visits Quebec for a month (February). Founds Guelph (23 April) and 
Goderich in Upper Canada. Visits the settlement of Galt (now part of 
Cambridge, Ontario) which William Dickson named in his honour.
1828 
Sustains a lasting injury from a severe fall. His wife and sons join him in 
Canada; sons attend school in Lower Canada.
1829
Recalled from management of the Canada Company (2 January). Arrives in 
Liverpool (20 May) and proceeds to London. Committed to King’s Bench 
Prison for debt (15 July–10 November). Recurring spells of illness begin.
“My Landlady and Her Lodgers” in Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine (August). 
1830
Lawrie Todd; Southennan; The Life of Lord Byron. Wife and sons return from 
Canada (June). Briefly edits The Courier, a London evening newspaper. 
Begins contributing regularly to Fraser’s Magazine, the New Monthly Magazine, 
and literary annuals. 
1831
Bogle Corbet; Lives of the Players; short stories (including “The Fatal Whisper,” 
“The Unguarded Hour,” and “The Book of Life”) in The Club-book, edited by 
chronology
xiii

Andrew Picken. Forms and becomes Secretary of the British American Land 
Company for settlement of the Eastern Townships in Lower Canada.
1832
Stanley Buxton; The Member; The Radical; “Our Borough” in Blackwood’s 
Edinburgh Magazine (October). Begins writing for Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine 
(e.g., “The Howdie,” September–October 1832). Suffers a stroke (October); 
illness becomes more crippling.
1833 
Eben Erskine; Poems; The Stolen Child; The Ouranologos, a joint venture with 
painter John Martin; Stories of the Study (containing “The Dean of Guild,” 
“The Jaunt,” and “The Seamstress,” among others); The Autobiography of John 
Galt. Resigns from the British American Land Company due to illness. Sons 
John and Thomas emigrate to Canada. 
1834
The Literary Life, and Miscellanies, of John Galt; “The Mem, or Schoolmistress” 
in Fraser’s Magazine (August). Son Alexander leaves for Canada to work for 
the British American Land Company. Moves to Greenock and settles with 
his wife at the home of his sister, Agnes Macfie. Death of William Blackwood.
1835
Efforts of an Invalid (poetry). Continues to write and publish short fiction, 
chiefly in Fraser’s Magazine and Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine (e.g., “Tribulations 
of the Rev. Cowal Kilmun,” November 1835–January 1836).
1836
“A Rich Man” in Tait’s Edinburgh Magazine (June–August).
1838–39
Edits Diary Illustrative of the Times of George the Fourth.
1839
Dies at Greenock (11 April). The Demon of Destiny and Other Poems published 
posthumously. Elizabeth Tilloch Galt joins her sons in Canada.
chronology
xiv

INTRODUCTION
The present volume of the Edinburgh Edition of the Works of John Galt 
brings together three short novels that display different facets of Galt’s 
creative abilities. Glenfell is his first publication in the style of Scottish 
fiction for which he would become best known; Andrew of Padua, the 
Improvisatore is a unique synthesis of his experiences with theatre, 
­educational writing, and travel in the Mediterranean; and The Omen is 
a haunting gothic tale. Each story was originally published in one short 
volume – a form that Galt preferred, but one that found little favour 
with publishers, circulating libraries, and readers in an age dominated 
by triple-decker novels. Thus, the history of how these tales came to 
be written and published demonstrates Galt’s entrepreneurial efforts 
to bring shorter fiction onto the literary market. With their easily 
readable scope and their vivid themes, each of the three stories has a 
distinct charm. At the same time, they cast light on significant phases 
in Galt’s career as a writer and on his versatility in experimenting with 
new themes and styles.
The Periodical Novelist, or The Circulating Library
Glenfell and Andrew of Padua were part of the same publishing venture: 
a series of short novels for which Galt, albeit anonymously, seems to 
have been a prime mover. During the years 1819 and 1820, he lived 
in London and published heavily with the firms of Richard Phillips 
and John Souter. Besides contributing articles to Phillips’ Monthly 
­Magazine, Galt compiled pedagogical works on history and geography 
for the use of schoolchildren; most of these appeared under the pseu­
donyms “Reverend T. Clark” and “Captain Samuel Prior.” He was forty 
years old, and his writing career up to this point comprised moderately 
successful accounts of his travels in the Mediterranean, biographies, 
dramas, articles on political economy and other non-fictional topics, 
and a large number of school textbooks. His only fictional publication, 
a two-volume tale entitled The Majolo that appeared in 1815–16, had 
fallen flat. 
Nevertheless, in 1819 the publisher Phillips and his regular writer

Galt collaborated to start a monthly series of fiction aimed at private 
purchasers as well as circulating libraries. This series of “superior new 
Novels and Novellettes” was first announced in the October 1819 issue 
of Phillips’ Monthly Magazine; it was to consist partly of “translations 
from the French, Italian, German, Spanish, and oriental languages” 
and partly of original works for which “some of the first writers of 
the day have pledged their co-operation.”1 Over the next five months, 
it was advertised in the Monthly Magazine as a “Periodical Series of 
Original Novels, Romances, and Tales,” “Novelties for Novel ­Readers,” 
and “Classical New Novels.”2 Besides the eminence of the writers 
and the quality of the translations, a particular selling point was to be 
the reliable and relatively affordable price of six shillings per ­volume, 
­regardless of the volume’s length. The series was published under 
two interchangeable titles, The Periodical Novelist and The Circulating 
­Library, both of which suggest an attempt to capitalize on contempo­
rary reading habits. The “Advertisement to the Series” that was printed 
at the beginning of volume 1 – that is, Galt’s Glenfell – is quite explicit 
about the intention to woo circulating libraries as well as private pur­
chasers by providing a commodity that is available at a “cheap rate,” yet 
counts as “a monthly luxury above all price” (2–3).3
The advertisement also intimates that the series will allow for quick 
publication (“an early view”) of work by new authors (“literary 
­amateurs”), and that it will be a venue for tales that “would probably 
have been rejected by the modern publishers of Novels, on account 
of their brevity” (2–3). This attempt to create an alternative outlet for 
publication hints at Galt’s collaboration in the series from the begin­
ning, since it resembles other projects he had previously undertaken. 
Some six years earlier, Galt pitched a similar monthly series of dramas 
to publisher Henry Colburn, to be entitled The Rejected Theatre; it was 
to include plays that had been turned down by the licensed theatres 
of Covent Garden and Drury Lane. The provocative title reflected 
Galt’s frustration over the rejection of plays he himself had submitted 
for performance and his suspicion that the theatre managers had not 
bothered to read them properly, if at all.4 The Rejected Theatre was soon 
1 The Monthly Magazine; or, British Register, 48 (1819), p. 262.
2 Monthly Magazine, 48 (1819), p. 347; 49 (1820), p. 70; 49 (1820), p. 156.
3 When no further specification is given, numbers in parentheses refer to 
pages in the present volume.
4 See The Autobiography of John Galt, 2 vols (London: Cochrane and McCrone, 
1833), I, p. 264.
introduction
xvi

retitled, somewhat more neutrally, The New British Theatre; A Selection 
of Original Dramas, not yet acted; some of which have been offered for 
­representation, but not accepted, and four volumes were published over 
the course of 1814 and 1815. Galt drew on The New British Theatre in 
various ways when writing tales for the Periodical Novelist series, as is 
especially evident in Andrew of Padua’s engagement with the world 
of the theatre. But The Periodical Novelist proved even more short-
lived than The New British Theatre; after three volumes – two of them 
­written by Galt – it quietly folded. Because of Galt’s heavy involvement 
with this monthly series and because of what it reveals about some of 
his earliest forays into the marketplace for fiction, the title pages and 
prefatory material for the Periodical Novelist or Circulating Library are 
included in the present edition.
Glenfell; or, Macdonalds and Campbells
Galt’s two anonymously published contributions to the series are 
­nevertheless remarkable, each in its own way. The first one appeared 
on 15 January 1820 as a duodecimo volume of 328 pages with a three-
part title: Glenfell; or, Macdonalds and Campbells. An Edinburgh Tale of 
the Nineteenth Century. Although long forgotten, this delightful story 
is key to an understanding of Galt’s development as a writer because 
it is his first publication in the style that soon after made him famous: 
the humorous, socially and historically insightful tale of Scottish life. 
Both of Glenfell’s subtitles are significant for locating the book 
within historical and literary contexts. The subtitle Macdonalds 
and Campbells simultaneously raises and defuses expectations of a 
­dramatic historical plot that might have centered on centuries-old 
feuds between the Macdonald and Campbell clans, evoking un­re­
solved tensions within Highland society that Galt’s Scottish readers 
would have associated with the 1692 Massacre of Glencoe. But, with its 
omission of definite articles, the phrase “Macdonalds and Campbells” 
(rather than “the Macdonalds and the Campbells”) carries somewhat 
different connotations, hinting instead at the confusion of names and 
identities that underlies the novel’s comic plot. The action of Glenfell 
plays itself out among several Macdonalds and several Campbells 
residing comfortably in the small compass of Edinburgh’s New Town, 
which had just completed building at the time the novel appeared and 
was attracting Highland families to the city in increasing numbers. 
­Although Galt’s family came from lowland Ayrshire, he had Highland 
introduction
xvii

connections, especially at this point in his career. Due to his work 
with the Caledonian Asylum, a charitable organization for orphaned 
Scottish children, he had been involved with the Highland Society 
of London since 1814; in 1818, he became a Director of the Highland 
Society in Greenock, a town that already had a significant Highland 
population when Galt was growing up there during the 1790s. Later, 
in his memoirs, he mentions the Gaelic associations of the Galt name 
and his own possible ancestry in the Highlands of Perthshire.5 While 
the disruption and depopulation of Highland communities from the 
mid-eighteenth century onward forms a larger historical backdrop to 
the novel, the action of Glenfell confines itself to a small, domestic scale. 
Its sphere is that of professional and fashionable life; its characters 
range from members of the middle class such as the businessman Mr. 
Ruart to hereditary nobility such as the Laird of Glenfell who, while 
he has taken up the practice of law in Edinburgh, remains a clan chief. 
Most importantly, it is about the ways these classes have begun to 
intermingle – in the friendship of Glenfell and Ruart, who are former 
schoolmates, in intermarriages between classes and clans, and in the 
relocation of Highlanders to Edinburgh and Glasgow. By focusing on 
social interactions among Macdonalds, Campbells, and other High­
land families in these rapidly changing communities, Galt anticipates 
the perspective his fiction would take vis-à-vis larger historical move­
ments in Annals of the Parish and other novels of the following years. 
Glenfell’s second subtitle, An Edinburgh Tale of the Nineteenth 
­Century, also evokes and undercuts expectations. It gestures toward 
the genre of the historical novel that Walter Scott had popularized 
six years earlier; but instead of offering a tale of eighteenth-century 
adventure in the manner of Scott’s Waverley (1814), Galt locates his 
characters in a nineteenth-century social world more akin to those 
of Maria Edgeworth and Jane Austen. All the events of Glenfell occur 
on a restrained domestic scale, beginning with a misdelivered issue of 
the Edinburgh Review, climaxing with a bankruptcy negotiation, and 
ending with the marriages of Macdonalds and Campbells and Glenfell 
himself. Urban geography plays an important part throughout Glenfell. 
In 1820, Edinburgh’s New Town was brand new; the residential district 
built by architects Robert Adam and Robert Reid based on the plans 
laid out by James Craig in the 1760s had just been completed. The 
handsome architecture designed around a symmetrical grid of roads, 
5 The Literary Life, and Miscellanies, of John Galt, 3 vols (Edinburgh: Black­
wood and London: Cadell, 1834), I, pp. 256–7.
introduction
xviii

squares, and crescents provides the main stage for the characters’ 
movements in Glenfell. By introducing a subplot about the Glasgow 
merchant Mr. Ruart into the story, Galt also depicts the relationship 
between professional Edinburgh and mercantile Glasgow as he has 
characters travel from one city to the other along ever-accelerating 
stagecoach routes.
Galt’s experience as a dramatist is clearly evident in Glenfell. He 
based the novel on “Auld Reekie; or, a Mistake in Edinburgh,” a play 
he had written sometime during the preceding decade but only pub­
lished much later in volume 3 of his Literary Life, and Miscellanies (1834). 
More specifically, Glenfell’s plot resembles French comédie ­d’intrigue in 
the use of mistaken identities, the predominance of dialogue, and an 
approximate unity of time. The events take place over a very few days, 
and the scene shifts back and forth between simultaneous goings-on in 
Edinburgh and Glasgow. There are frequent quotations from and allu­
sions to Shakespeare, which Galt uses to parallel the domestic drama 
of Glenfell with Shakespearean comedies of mistaken identity and 
hyperbolically juxtapose it with tragedy.6 All thirty-five chapters begin 
with epigraphs that are drawn from thirteen different Shakespearean 
plays and from a wide variety of eighteenth-century British literature. 
These epigraphs embed Galt’s modest tale within an ­elaborate, if ironic, 
literary heritage.
Galt’s recent, busy months of writing educational texts for 
Phillips and Souter also influenced the composition of Glenfell. As mis­
identifications of Macdonalds and Campbells proliferate throughout 
the novel, Galt allows his reader to fall into some of these misunder­
standings along with the characters in order to instill a ­lesson about 
reading attentively. Not until chapter 5 does the omniscient narrator 
clear up some of the initial confusion with a pedantic aside: “Here 
it becomes necessary to apprise the reader that in our Northern 
­Comedy of Errors there are two Macdonalds as well as two Miss 
Campbells” (20). Further misunderstandings are stirred up, however, 
by the ­novel’s title character – the young, rich, handsome, poetically 
inclined lawyer Glenfell, whose impulsive actions and fondness for 
making rhetorical arguments that he doesn’t actually believe cause 
6 Galt’s engagement with Shakespeare around this time may also be reflected 
in a long review article of Nathan Drake’s Shakespeare and his Times in the 
April 1819 issue of the Edinburgh Monthly Review, which Ian A. Gordon 
attributes to him (John Galt: The Life of a Writer [Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, 
1972], p. 22).
introduction
xix

near-­catastrophic mistakes. The educative theme shows up again in 
Glenfell’s character development: he is taught by the emotional whirl­
wind of the novel’s events to amend his eccentric, devil’s-advocate 
demeanour and become a “proselyte to propriety” (117). 
The story’s happy ending involves a deus ex machina in the person 
of rich Mr. Grant, yet another Campbell relative who has just returned 
to Scotland after thirty-five years in colonial Upper Canada. The 
colonial motif aligns with Galt’s evolving business interests. Although 
his first voyage to Canada was still a few years away, he had learned 
enough detail about the country from an emigrant relative to publish 
a “Statistical Account of Upper Canada” in the Philosophical Magazine 
in 1807, and Canada would become a central focus of his own business 
affairs by the end of 1820, when he was appointed agent for Canadian 
claimants seeking compensation from the British government. But in 
addition to the fortuitous return of Mr. Grant, what makes the novel’s 
resolution possible is the common sense shown by the protagonists. 
Nineteenth-century Macdonalds and Campbells settle their differ­
ences according to social conventions and commercial negotiations 
rather than violence and retribution. The long-absent Highlander 
Mr. Grant ironically calls attention to this change in morés when he 
reflects:
I am a little sorry that we have been so easily reconciled, for 
I do not much like this modern moderation of feeling, this 
debating about the equity of things. I know not why a man 
whose race and line have for ages withstood the changes 
of time and chance, should, for the sake of mahogany 
chairs, plated ware, and cut glass, measure his manners by 
those of the temporary traffickers in cotton bags and sugar 
hogsheads. (106) 
Glenfell turns the historical romance that its title might have heralded 
into the irony of the everyday. The novel climaxes not with a battle, but 
with a bankruptcy hearing; its triumphal celebration is a dinner party 
enlivened by satire and a dose of slapstick comedy. 
Glenfell is thus of significant interest as Galt’s first published 
­Scottish novel and the first example of his distinctive approach to 
depicting the social history of his country. More specifically, Glenfell 
introduces names and scenes that he would develop further in the 
popular novels that followed. The second cousin of Mrs. Campbell 
Ardmore, Reverend Mr. Belwhidder (or Bellwhidder), would lend 
his name to Reverend Micah Balwhidder, the narrator-protagonist of 
introduction
xx

Annals of the Parish (1821). In Glenfell, a key item of Mrs. Campbell 
Ardmore’s banquet finery is borrowed from the Belwhidders, and the 
­Reverend nearly comes into view when he performs the double mar­
riage ceremony at the end of the novel. Galt also reprised the entire 
scene of Mrs. Campbell Ardmore’s autumn banquet, where she puts 
on a masterful show of gentility and generosity while shrewdly bor­
rowing and wheedling supplies in order to assemble the meal at the 
least possible cost to herself, in a tale he published three years later, The 
Gathering of the West (1823). Ruth Aldrich, one of the very few critics 
to have commented on Glenfell, notes the general significance of the 
novel as the first published example of motifs that recur throughout 
Galt’s Scottish fiction, including the selective use of Scots language 
and the depiction of strong female characters.7 
Nevertheless, Glenfell was not only forgotten but entirely lost from 
sight soon after its anonymous publication. A review in the Literary 
Chronicle and Weekly Review was lukewarm, describing Glenfell as “a 
tale neither destitute of interest, nor possessing any extraordinary 
degree of merit.” Still, the review continues, Glenfell is sufficiently “well 
written” to be a good advertisement for the Circulating Library series, 
which, the reviewer predicts, “will soon rank with the most popular 
periodical productions.”8 A French translation entitled Glenfell, ou les 
MacDonalds et les Campbells: Histoire Écossaise du 19e Siècle appeared 
in Paris in 1823, published together with a translation of Maria Edge­
worth’s 1804 tale “Murad the Unlucky.” In a preface, the anonymous 
translator identifies the author of Glenfell as “a true Englishman” (un 
veritable Anglais), noting nevertheless that the interest of the novel 
for French readers lies in its Scottish setting, since “a justly celebrated 
author” (that is, Walter Scott) has recently brought so much attention 
to Scotland.9 The translator, who seems to assume that Glenfell is by a 
male author but not to know that the author is Galt, notes that a man’s 
perspective on contemporary manners is especially valuable at a time 
when so many novels are written by women. 
Glenfell was never republished, and by the time Galt wrote his mem­
oirs in 1834 he remembered having written it only when reminded by a 
friend – although he immediately recalled, too, that it “was supposed 
7 Ruth I. Aldrich, John Galt (Boston: Twayne Publishers, 1978), p. 44.
8 Literary Chronicle and Weekly Review, 101.39 (12 February 1820), pp. 100–1.
9 Glenfell, ou les MacDonalds et les Campbells. Histoire Écossaise du 19e Siècle, 
suivie de Murad le Malheureux, par Miss Edgeworth (Paris: Persan, 1823), pp. 
xxx–xxxi.
introduction
xxi

to have some merit.”10 Copies of Glenfell are listed in the catalogues 
of circulating libraries during the 1820s and 1830s, but after that the 
novel disappeared from sight for almost a century and a half. A copy of 
the French translation remained in the British Library, and for literary 
scholars until the mid-twentieth century Glenfell was available only in 
this translated version. In the second half of the twentieth century, a 
few copies of Galt’s original came to light that are now held by libraries 
in Britain, Canada, and the United States. The copy in the University 
of Guelph Library has an inscription on the title page – “The parting 
Gift of an affectionate Son. Nov. 1824.” – that appears to be in Galt’s 
handwriting, making it likely that he gave this copy of Glenfell to 
his mother shortly before departing on his first trip to Canada. The 
­present edition marks the first time Glenfell has been published since 
1820.
Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore
Glenfell, volume 1 of the Periodical Novelist or Circulating Library series, 
appeared simultaneously with volume 2, an anonymous translation 
of the recent French novel Petrarch and Laura by Madame de Genlis. 
The third book in the series, published on 15 February 1820, seemed 
to offer readers further translations of European fiction. According 
to its title page, this duodecimo volume of 294 pages contained two 
tales: Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore: A Tale from the Italian of the 
Abbate Furbo and The Vindictive Father, or Lorenzo and Claudia, from 
the Spanish of Leandra of Valladerras. The provenance of the second 
tale is somewhat obscured by the idiosyncratic phrasing and ­spelling 
of the Spanish title and name, but The Vindictive Father is, in fact, 
translated from “Claudia y Don Lorenzo,” one of several inset stories 
in the nine-volume novel La Leandra written by Antonio Valladares de 
Sotomayor and published in Madrid between 1797 and 1807. It is quite 
possible that this translation was done by Galt, who amused himself 
with speed-translation exercises during his travels in the Mediterra­
nean from 1809 to 1811; in his Literary Life, he records that during a 
second trip to Gibraltar in 1812–13 he worked on his Spanish and read 
in the town libraries.11
10 Literary Life, I, p. 349.
11 Literary Life, I, p. 141. According to an advertisement pasted into the front 
inside cover of volume 1 (Glenfell) when it was published on 15 January, 
introduction
xxii

Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore, however, is a different story 
altogether. On the surface, it is a first-person narrative by a famous 
Italian author named Francisco Furbo. Most of his tale consists of 
a story-within-a-story told by an old man, Andrew, whom Furbo 
encounters in Rome. As Furbo treats Andrew to food and wine over 
the course of a few days, Andrew relates his autobiography – how he 
gave up an apprenticeship in a counting-house to join the theatre and 
became an internationally renowned improvvisatore, a performer of 
spontaneously composed poetry and song. But Andrew of Padua is 
eventually revealed to be a fraud and a trickster; what is more, the 
entire novel turns out to be a mise en abîme of performances within 
performances. Just as Andrew plays the improviser and the unreliable 
narrator in relation to Furbo, so Furbo plays the same role in relation 
to the reader.
In fact, the name of the supposed Italian author, Furbo, means 
“trickster” – and if that does not make readers suspicious, the elabo­
rate framing devices that surround his tale might do so. To explain 
the provenance of the story, the anonymous English translator 
begins by quoting an extract of a letter from the gentleman who 
­supposedly supplied him with the Italian original, which leads on into 
a ­pseudo-scholarly “Biographical Sketch of the Abbate Furbo” com­
plete with a history of Furbo’s novels and their reception in Italy. The 
biographical sketch claims to draw on multiple Italian biographies and 
editions of Furbo’s complete works. Among other things, the gifted 
author Furbo is credited with understanding fourteen languages 
and writing fluently in nine – although the biographical sketch also 
describes him, tellingly, as “an apt and shrewd spirit, with a knavish 
relish of mischief” (137). 
The ironies, inconsistencies, and word-play of the biographical 
sketch and the translator’s preface and footnotes reveal that the whole 
­volume 3 of The Periodical Novelist was originally intended to consist of “three 
exquisite Tales, elegantly translated from the Spanish of a modern Author.” 
If this plan was altered on short notice to one Spanish tale plus Andrew of 
Padua in time for volume 3 to be published on 15 March, Galt must have 
produced Andrew of Padua very quickly indeed. The pasted-in advertisement 
appears only in some of the extant copies of Glenfell; in the copies held by the 
University of Edinburgh Library and the Senate House Library, it is pasted 
over with a bookplate. The copy acquired by the Harry Ransom Center of 
the University of Texas at Austin in 1983 is the only known copy in which the 
advertisement is legible.
introduction
xxiii

thing is actually a hoax. Andrew of Padua participates in the fakery so 
often found in writings of the Romantic era, including gothic novels 
that purport to be based on found manuscripts and fictional editors 
who pretend to confer historical authenticity. Andrew of Padua is 
the first publication in which Galt hoaxed readers to such an extent, 
although he would soon join the contributors to Blackwood’s Edin­
burgh Magazine who excelled at this practice; he would use similar 
devices in The Ayrshire Legatees (1820–21) and, at least glancingly, in 
The Omen.
But the specialized form of tale-spinning that Galt draws on in 
Andrew of Padua – the figure of the Italian improvvisatore – derives 
directly from his travels in the Mediterranean between 1809 and 1811. 
The germ of Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore can be found in ­Voyages 
and Travels, the travel account that Galt published in 1812 after his 
return to Britain. A brief section entitled “An Improvisatore” recounts 
his meeting with an unnamed individual in Sicily who vaunts his own 
services as a tour guide, claiming to be “the best ­improvisatore in all 
Palermo.” As in Andrew of Padua, the narrator invites the improvvisa­
tore to visit him at his lodgings, only to have his landlord advise him 
to avoid this character at all costs: “‘Oh my God!’ cried he, ‘that is 
one grand Furbo … When he come again, you tell him to go to hell’.”12 
The character of Andrew of Padua is an amalgam of the “grand Furbo” 
of an improvvisatore whom Galt himself encountered in ­Palermo, and 
a more sympathetic improvising performer who appears in another 
early ­publication of Galt’s: the biography of ­American painter Ben­­
jamin West, a significant part of which is devoted to West’s trip to 
Italy in 1759–60. While in a coffee-house in Rome, West encounters 
“the most celebrated Improvisatore in all Italy.” This improvvisatore 
is described as “a venerable old man, with a guitar” who goes by the 
name of “Homer” (the same epithet claimed by Andrew of Padua) 
and extemporizes an impressive ode on the theme of “an American 
come to study the fine arts in Rome” – that is to say, on Benjamin 
West himself.13 The episode of West’s encounter with the Roman 
improvvisatore called Homer in 1760 makes it possible to take at face 
value the few chronological markers in Andrew of Padua: the trans­
lator’s ­opening remark that “about sixty years ago” there was “a very 
12 Voyages and Travels in the Years 1809, 1810, and 1811 (London: Cadell and 
Davies, 1812), p. 45.
13 The Life and Studies of Benjamin West, Esq. (London: Cadell and Davies, 
1816), pp. 114–15.
introduction
xxiv

celebrated performer of that kind at Rome, known to all travellers by 
the name of Omero or Homer” (136), and Andrew’s boast to Furbo 
at the beginning of chapter 10 that “every person who visited Rome 
about thirty years ago, considered me as one of the standing miracles 
of the Papal Court” (173). From the standpoint of 1820, when the story 
was published, this means that Andrew would have reached the height 
of his fame in Rome in 1760 (“sixty years ago”) and his encounter 
with Furbo would have taken place in 1790 (“thirty years ago”), when 
Andrew had become an old man. Most of the remaining historical allu­
sions in both the biographical sketch and Andrew’s tale fall into place 
around those dates – with the exception of a mischievous footnote, in 
the midst of a chapter about the credibility of storytellers, where the 
translator claims that Furbo wrote this tale “before the establishment 
of the independence of the United States” (194). Since Galt was pre­
paring the second ­volume of his ­biography of Benjamin West for the 
press simultaneously with Andrew of Padua, it is not surprising that 
traces of West’s adventures made their way into Andrew of Padua’s 
story.
In other ways, too, the most illuminating frame of reference for 
Andrew of Padua is Galt’s own writing career. The story gradually 
reveals more and more elaborate correspondences with the many 
types of writing at which he had tried his hand: travel accounts, 
drama, opera librettos, biography, fiction. These allusions are some­
times quirky or satirical, other times so precise as to make Andrew of 
Padua look like an allegory of Galt’s experiences in the publishing and 
theatrical world of London during the years 1812 to 1819. The motif 
of flute-playing, for instance, crops up repeatedly in Galt’s early work. 
The hero of The Majolo plays the flute, as Galt did during his youth, 
and as does Andrew of Padua. Indeed, Andrew’s temporary obsession 
with flute-playing is a bizarre episode that seems to function more as a 
coded authorial signature than an intrinsic part of the plot. Names and 
characters that appear in Andrew of Padua are also to be found in The 
Earthquake (1820), the long novel that Galt wrote while living in Scot­
land in 1818. It features two improvvisatore characters: Salpano, “the 
best poet in all Sicily,” an extemporizer who is so talented that he could 
have made a killing on the London stage, and Andrea, an illiterate old 
man who “often deceived his auditors into a belief that his stories were 
actually his own adventures.”14 Andrew of Padua looks very much like 
14 The Earthquake: A Tale, 3 vols (Edinburgh: Blackwood and London: Cadell, 
1820), I, pp. 297–8 and II, p. 260. 
introduction
xxv

a conflation of these two characters. Two other minor figures in The 
Earthquake, Furbo the highway robber and Father Francisco the priest, 
together provide the pseudonym “Abbate Francisco Furbo.” 
Andrew of Padua is as much a portrayal of Galt’s experiences with 
publishers and theatre managers in London as it is of his Mediter­ranean 
travels. The story makes the Italian improvvisatore into an avatar of the 
British writer struggling to earn a living by grasping the opportunities 
offered by the late-Romantic marketplace. Andrew of Padua’s theme of 
the poet-performer who literally sings for his supper had ironic per­
sonal relevance for Galt as he wrote school textbooks, magazine articles, 
and fiction for Richard Phillips and other publishers as quickly as it 
could be printed. The counting-house into which Galt places Andrew 
in the early chapters, and the theatrical sphere in which Andrew later 
tries to make his way, are worlds whose frustrations Galt knew all too 
well. Having failed to interest the Theatres Royal of London in the 
tragedies and comedies he had written, Galt developed strong views 
on the shortcomings of the theatre industry that found expression in 
The New British Theatre, the volumes of rejected plays that he edited 
in 1814–15. In chapter 16 of Andrew of Padua, Andrew outlines a ­lyrical 
drama that is actually an opera libretto entitled Orpheus, written and 
published by Galt himself in volume 3 of The New British Theatre. Even 
when the allusion is less blatant than this, Galt’s own experiences with 
the London theatres clearly provide background for the novel. Galt is 
nevertheless even-handed in his characterization of theatre managers: 
they range from the dignified manager of the opera house in Palermo 
in chapter 18 who is credited with “solid attainments, … great skill, 
and … exquisite taste” (207) to the agent of the London opera house 
in chapter 19, a former tradesman who can easily be hoodwinked by 
Andrew because he knows no Italian and “possesse[s] about as much 
taste in Italian music as his bidets” (209). 
In the context of magazine publishing, too, Andrew the improvvisa­
tore is an all too realistic representation of Galt the “bookseller’s hack,” 
as he sometimes called himself, wryly echoing a comment by John 
Cam Hobhouse.15 The plot device whereby Andrew manages to cajole 
a glass of wine or something to eat from his listener Furbo at the end 
of almost every chapter might evoke Galt’s relation to his publishers, 
from whom he was often obliged to ask for cash advances on his next 
piece of writing. There may be a more pointed satire in chapter 12 
of Andrew of Padua, where Andrew contracts with an ­Italian printer 
15 Autobiography, I, p. 187.
introduction
xxvi

named Masano to publish his improvisations. Masano is described as 
“a little fat man, with a face of singular rotundity and fulness” (182) who 
proves avaricious, impatient, and irascible – details that recall contem­
porary descriptions of Richard Phillips’ appearance and personality.16 
The educational writing that Galt had been doing for Phillips also 
leaves its mark on Andrew of Padua. In individual episodes as well as in 
the plot of the story as a whole, Galt tries to inculcate habits of careful 
reading and observation by making fun of characters who allow them­
selves to be hoodwinked. In chapter 15, for instance, while sailing from 
Leghorn to Messina, Andrew takes part in a storytelling game where 
a multicultural group of passengers entertain one another with tall 
tales. Andrew learns an important lesson about how not to be taken 
in when a Frenchman poses as a learned member of the Academy of 
Sciences but turns out to be an ordinary barber. In Andrew of Padua as 
a whole, it is Francisco Furbo who eventually realizes that he has fallen 
for Andrew’s elaborate story about his international fame; listeners, 
Andrew chides him, should learn to “exercise their own faculties a little 
more cleverly” (222) in order to avoid being cajoled out of their wine 
and dinners by clever performers. Finally, with a paratextual apparatus 
consisting of the “Biographical Sketch of the Abbate Furbo” and foot­
notes by the pseudo-translator, Galt performs the same exercise on 
his actual readers, teaching us to be more prudent when it comes to 
evaluating narrative authority.
Andrew of Padua is thus a lynchpin in Galt’s career between his 
writing of school texts and his association with the hoaxing group of 
authors involved with Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine, for which he  
began to write around this time. It is also an ironic literary memoir 
that traces Galt’s trajectory from his Mediterranean travels to his 
breakthrough Scottish fiction by way of his biographical, ­pedagogical, 
and dramatic writings. Yet, like Glenfell, this key text completely 
­disappeared from view following its publication. The only review to 
be found is a brief, predictably favourable notice in Phillips’ Monthly 
Magazine. “The adventures of the Improvisatore, related by himself, 
are little inferior in nature and genuine humour to the exploits of Gil 
Blas, and the best itinerant heroes of Fielding,” this reviewer opined; 
“Andrew is a true son of Fortune, but bears her vicissitudes in so good 
humoured a manner, and relates them with so much grace and nature, 
that (which is now seldom the case) we laid down the book with an 
16 See Cyrus Redding, Fifty Years’ Recollections, Literary and Personal, 3 vols 
(London: Skeet, 1858), I, p. 65.
introduction
xxvii

actual feeling of regret.”17 Although the title Andrew of Padua appears 
in the list of published works at the end of his Literary Life in 1834, 
even Galt claims at that point to have forgotten about it completely: 
“Andrew of Padua … has entirely, even to the name, escaped my mem­
ory,” he admits in the last paragraph of his memoirs.18
It is hard to credit Galt’s casual dismissal of the tale, however, given 
that he continued to rework it for several years under the title “The 
Improvisatore” and eventually republished it in a different form. On 
18 May 1822, while sending William Blackwood portions of the book 
manuscript for The Steam-Boat, Galt also sent him a revised version 
of “the Improvisatore” to be published as part of a collection that he 
called “the Lazaretto.”19 In a letter of 28 May, he suggested that “the 
Quarrantine” [sic] would be a better title for the collection of tales.20 
Blackwood appears to have declined the stories, but they came in 
handy in October 1824 when Galt, on the point of leaving for Canada, 
desperately needed to fill space in a three-volume historical novel he 
was publishing with Oliver & Boyd. In “The Quarantine; or, Tales of 
the Lazaretto,” which fills the second half of volume 3 of Galt’s Rothelan, 
the text of Andrew of Padua appears in recycled form as “The Improvi­
satoré; or, The Italian’s Tale.” This time, the pseudo-narrator Francisco 
Furbo is replaced by a different frame story: “The Quarantine” takes 
place in Messina, Sicily, where an international group of travelers con­
fined in the lazaretto because of the danger of plague decide to pass 
the time by telling stories to one another and assessing the credibility 
of each storyteller. The Italian “Improvisatoré” relates the second of 
the three tales. By embedding his ­autobiographical narrative within 
a scene of instruction about how to tell truth from fiction, this new 
context intensifies the pedagogical orientation of the original story.
Other differences between Andrew of Padua and “The Improvisa­
toré; or, The Italian’s Tale” cast light on the evolution of Galt’s writing 
habits and the intentions of the original 1820 version. “The Improvi­
satoré” is shorter, ending abruptly with the protagonist’s departure 
from London in the company of Belletta and her lover (that is, halfway 
through chapter 20 of Andrew of Padua), after which Galt wraps up the 
story with a couple of hasty sentences. The style of “The Improvisatoré” 
17 Monthly Magazine, 49 (1820), p. 357.
18 Literary Life, I, p. 349.
19 Galt to William Blackwood, 18 May 1822, MS 4008, National Library of 
Scotland (NLS).
20 Galt to William Blackwood, 28 May 1822, MS 4008, NLS.
introduction
xxviii

is in many places tighter and less wordy, and there are no divisions into 
chapters as in Andrew of Padua. A few episodes are omitted entirely; 
likely motivations for these cuts are to maintain a more moral tone 
(for instance, a nighttime assignation between a young woman and her 
lover disappears), to moderate the satire of monks and monasteries 
(chapters 13 and 14, on Andrew’s brief period as a novice, are deleted), 
and to remove some of the autobiographical allusions to Galt and his 
works (“The Improvisatoré” contains neither the synopsis of Galt’s 
opera “Orpheus” nor the overview of Sicily that echoes his Voyages 
and Travels). The revised version also omits brief character sketches of 
some minor figures, which raises the suspicion that Galt had intended 
these descriptions to refer to specific individuals when he first wrote 
Andrew of Padua; this would not be the only time that he was per­
suaded to omit ad hominem satires when he revised his original text. 
The word-for-word and episode-for-episode correspondence of most 
of these two narratives, however, leaves no doubt that Galt had Andrew 
of Padua in front of him while ­rewriting it as “The Improvisatoré.” As 
his correspondence with Oliver & Boyd shows, although he was fran­
tically busy wrapping up affairs in ­Britain before sailing for Canada, he 
concerned himself with details of the 1824 publication, among other 
things finding time to correct the proofs himself.21
More generally, Galt continued to portray improvisers and wily 
tricksters throughout his later fiction. A Sicilian improvvisatore or 
“provisatory” is still accosting Scottish travellers to Palermo over 
twenty years later in his last, comic rewriting of his Mediterranean 
voyage as “The Jaunt” in Stories of the Study (1833). Characteristics of 
Andrew the improviser are evident in the protagonists of the better-­
known fiction Galt wrote in the years following Andrew of Padua. The 
names of Andrew Wylie, Provost Pawkie, and Lawrie Todd all encode, 
in English or Scots, the wily character of their bearers, as does the name 
of the Italian Francisco Furbo. Indeed, Galt’s choice of the typically 
Scottish name “Andrew” for his Italian improvvisatore is an indication 
that Italian and Scottish contexts are being superimposed in Andrew 
of Padua. Ironically, the fiction of the imaginary author Francisco 
Furbo proved so durable that Andrew of Padua is much more often 
listed under the pseudonym “Furbo” than under Galt’s own name, 
both in the catalogues of nineteenth-century circulating libraries and 
in the few rare-book libraries that hold copies today. The present vol­
ume brings Andrew of Padua, the Improvisatore back into view as an 
21 Galt to Oliver & Boyd, [October 1824], Acc.5000/188, NLS.
introduction
xxix

­entertaining “furbo” of a text, as well as an informative ­illustration of 
the development of Galt’s fiction. 
The Omen
The six years that separate The Omen from the two previous tales 
brought about significant changes in Galt’s status and career. Thanks 
to the numerous novels and periodical contributions he published 
during the early 1820s, Galt was by mid-decade an established, popular 
fiction writer. He was also engaged in the major business enterprise 
of his career, the Canada Company that bought Crown land and sold 
it to settlers on behalf of the British government, and he made a first 
trip to North America to pursue this venture in 1825. Galt kept up his 
commercial and literary activities ­simultaneously, writing at a daunt­
ing pace while moving wherever business and family matters took him. 
Yet The Omen arose during a period of unusual ­anxiety and depression. 
The writing of the tale coincided with a national financial crisis that 
began in the latter months of 1825, involving a major stock market 
crash, widespread bank failures in England, and aftershocks that hit the 
British publishing industry with particular severity. Galt’s own affairs 
were precarious as he anxiously awaited parliamentary decisions that 
would determine the fate of the Canada Company; “my mind was in 
no very comfortable state,” he recalls in his ­Autobiography.22 Added to 
his concerns over business was the failing health of his mother, who 
was being cared for by his sister in Scotland during the last months 
of her life. In a letter to his sister dated 13 January 1826, while he was 
finishing the manuscript of The Omen, Galt reveals his state of mind 
with unusual frankness, alluding to his need to borrow money to see 
his family through the financial crisis and his general depression about 
believing himself to be a disappointment to their mother:
I feel that at no former period of my life was I so depressed – 
‘hope deferred’ too long has made me sick at heart & I begin 
to suffer, for the first time, the gnawing of disappointed 
expectation. Yet the same sort of miracle, from light to 
darkness, is continued to be performed around me & I 
know not, nor have I ever heard of one who has had less 
reason to despair. I tremble in my gratitude to providence 
22 Autobiography, I, p. 339.
introduction
xxx

when I think of the path that seems marked out for me 
along the edge of peril.23
Galt’s characteristic optimism about the coming of better times is of 
a piece with the resilience that made it possible for him to continue 
writing through depression to produce The Omen. His friend and early 
biographer D. M. Moir, aware of the difficult circumstances in which 
the tale was written, refers to it as “one of the most beautiful, and 
­perhaps the most elaborately finished of his productions.”24
Galt himself commented that The Omen is “not … at all in the 
style for which I am best known.”25 As wide-ranging as his themes and 
genres had been up to this point, The Omen undertakes something 
­different from almost all his previous writing. Its first-person ­narrator 
is a young English nobleman named Henry and it is set mainly in 
Oxford, parts of East Anglia, and the environs of London. The plot 
­features a gothic motif of narrowly averted incest that was new to Galt’s 
fiction, although he had paid considerable attention to similar themes 
in Byron’s poetry. Recalling the origins of The Omen in his Literary Life, 
Galt claims that “it is founded on the story to which I alluded to Lord 
Byron on speaking one day of the ‘Bride of Abydos’.”26 The story in 
question is a four-volume novel entitled The Three ­Brothers by Joshua 
Pickersgill that was published in 1803. Galt was so struck by similari­
ties between The Bride of Abydos and this convoluted gothic romance 
that he returned several times to the question of whether Byron had 
plagiarized The Three Brothers or perhaps even written it himself when 
very young.27 
While Galt intimates that The Omen also derives from this source, 
any resemblance to The Three Brothers is very vague. Instead, there are 
stronger connections to themes in some of his own earlier fiction. Galt 
had long been interested in premonitions, extrasensory perception, 
and semi-mystical sympathies – as The Omen’s narrator puts it, in the 
belief that the mind may be “endowed with other faculties of percep­
tion than those of the corporeal senses” (237). In his Autobiography 
23 Galt to Mrs. Macfie, 13 January 1826, MS A277054, H. B. Timothy Collec­
tion, University of Guelph Library.
24 “Biographical Memoir of the Author,” The Annals of the Parish and The Ayr­
shire Legatees, by John Galt (Edinburgh and London: Blackwood, 1841), p. 
xxxviii.
25 MS A277053, H. B. Timothy Collection, University of Guelph Library.
26 Literary Life, I, pp. 269–70; see also II, p. 185.
27 Autobiography, II, pp. 179–85 and 224; Literary Life, I, pp. 24 and 307–8.
introduction
xxxi

Galt describes The Omen as “a continuation … of a former attempt to 
embody presentiments and feelings in situations not uncommon”28 – 
that is, a continuation of his first published tale, The Majolo, whose 
title character is similarly susceptible to presentiments and intuitive 
sympathies. In both The Majolo and The Omen, Galt distances himself 
from a belief in omens by ascribing this belief to fictional characters 
and exploring its effect on their psyche. He does, however, identify 
personally with another one of the psychological phenomena illus­
trated by The Omen: a mental faculty that he calls “local memory” 
and that he believes himself to possess in a “remarkable” degree.29 
Galt glosses local memory as “the peculiarity of recalling objects of 
sight, and describing them as if they were present”; according to the 
examples he gives in the Autobiography, it is a capacity for intense 
visualization that can recall vivid details of past scenes in a way that 
“helps to make individuality and to mark identity.”30 In The Omen, Galt 
transfers the propensity for local memory to the protagonist Henry, 
whose sensorially vivid memories of scenes from his childhood might 
today be described as flashbacks to childhood trauma.
Occasional scenes and motifs in The Omen can be traced to other 
facets of Galt’s experience. The shipboard scenes in Epoch III reflect 
his background as the son of a sea-captain who grew up in port towns; 
his musical inclinations and his ability to play the flute make their 
way into the episode of the mystical German flute teacher; and his 
portrayal of the lives of the aristocracy owes something to the titled 
acquaintances, including Lord Byron, whom he visited while residing 
in London. Datable allusions in The Omen suggest that the narrator 
Henry is born about the same time as Galt himself (1779), and the 
unusual term “Epochs” into which Henry’s narrative is divided is 
the term that Galt would use seven years later in composing his own 
Autobiography. Although the biographical parallels end there, the 
historical background to Henry’s narrative coincides with events 
that Galt ­himself lived through: threats of invasion by revolutionary 
and, later, Napoleonic France; the presence of new military garrisons 
near the English coast; restrictions on travel to the Continent during 
the early years of the nineteenth century. The political history of the 
Napoleonic era is repressed into the background of the narrative, 
yet the wartime atmosphere and the prominence of military figures 
28 Autobiography, I, p. 339.
29 Autobiography, I, p. 340.
30 Autobiography, I, pp. 342–3.
introduction
xxxii

throughout The Omen are crucial aspects of the story. The personal 
crisis of the narrator Henry corresponds to a time of national crisis; 
his identification with Hamlet and his sense of victimization by an 
irresistible fate in an incomprehensible world gains intensity when 
placed in historical as well as psychological and theological contexts. 
The end of Henry’s narrative approximately corresponds with the 
end of the Napoleonic wars in 1815, and the editor’s statement in the 
postscript that about ten years have passed since Henry’s letters were 
handed over for publication brings the timeline to 1825, the date of 
The Omen’s publication. Although the ironic postscript added by an 
unnamed editor contrasts with the meditative tone of Henry’s story, 
it is possible that the date and location “Castle-Bromage, 10th Jan. 
1826” with which the postscript end reflect Galt’s whereabouts as he 
completed the last pages of the manuscript. Symbolically at least, the 
name Castle-Bromage or Castle-Bromwich, a staging place on the 
road between London and Scotland, seems to gesture toward Galt’s 
unsettled, transitory state at the time.
Galt wrote The Omen in the last three months of 1825 while staying 
in London, having recently returned from his first voyage to North 
America. Correspondence between William Blackwood in Edinburgh 
and his nineteen-year-old son Alexander, who had been sent to Lon­
don to learn the publishing trade, chronicles the tos and fros of the 
manuscript’s production. The Omen, to be “elegantly printed in a 
pocket volume,”31 was first announced in Blackwood’s Edinburgh Maga­
zine under “Works Preparing for Publication” in September, October, 
and November 1825. As Galt requested, it was advertised on the same 
page as the Scottish novel he was writing concurrently, The Last of the 
Lairds – but while Lairds was advertised as being “by the Author of 
Annals of the Parish, &c.,” the separate listing of The Omen intentionally 
concealed the fact that it was by the same author.32 Alexander Black­
wood began receiving copy from Galt at the beginning of November, 
and it was set in type by the London printer Spottiswoode as soon as 
pages were received. Alexander relayed proofs back and forth between 
the printer and Galt, after which the proofs were sent to Edinburgh for 
William Blackwood’s approval. Waiting impatiently for Galt to supply 
the rest of the manuscript to Alexander, Blackwood Sr. grumbled 
about Galt’s visit to Brighton for a few days in mid-November, and 
worried that his trip home to Greenock at the end of that month due 
31 Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine, 18 (July–December 1825), p. 638.
32 Galt to William Blackwood, 11 September 1825, MS 4014, NLS.
introduction
xxxiii

to his mother’s serious illness would further delay the writing process. 
Although Galt assured the Blackwoods that he would keep sending 
copy throughout his travels, William remained concerned that delays 
would prevent the book from appearing in time for New Year’s buying. 
As it turned out, by year’s end the publishing industry in London and 
Edinburgh was in chaos due to the stock-market crash and book pur­
chases had fallen off dramatically, so the Blackwoods were resigned 
to the delay in publication of The Omen while they awaited further 
developments. 
On 3 January 1826, Galt wrote to William Blackwood that “the MS 
all but two chapters is finished”;33 he completed the text at the end 
of January. On 29 January, Alexander Blackwood wrote to his father 
that “Mr Galt talks of doing a funny thing for the preface”;34 during 
the following week, the “funny thing” turned from a preface into a 
postscript, which Galt sent to the printer on 7 February. The Omen 
(dated 1825) finally appeared in mid-February 1826 as a slim octavo 
volume without any authorial attribution, priced at four shillings and 
sixpence. The pages of the original edition leave ample white space 
at the end of each short chapter, giving the story an episodic feel and 
visually emphasizing the beginnings and ends of chapters, which 
often contain meditative passages on time and fate. On 16 February, 
Alexander Blackwood posted twenty-five copies to his father and 
had a further five hundred copies sent from London to Edinburgh 
by boat. All parties involved, the Blackwoods and Galt himself, were 
­concerned that it was an inauspicious moment for book-buying. In 
their correspondence, they strategize about the timing and advertising 
of the publication, and consider whether concealing Galt’s authorship 
entirely or letting out the secret will be likely to have a more positive 
impact.
Sales of The Omen were indeed slow in both England and Scotland 
and the critical response was mixed, although prominent authors to 
whom William Blackwood distributed the first copies returned very 
complimentary comments. “All clever people admire & praise it 
highly,” William Blackwood wrote to his son, “but ordinary folks think 
it a painful story.”35 Galt was pleased about this “favourable opinion” 
as well as about the “complete mystification” as to the identity of the 
33 Galt to William Blackwood, 3 January 1826, MS 4017, NLS.
34 Alexander Blackwood to William Blackwood, 29 January 1826, MS 4016, 
NLS.
35 William Blackwood to Alexander Blackwood, 8 March 1826, MS 4016, NLS.
introduction
xxxiv

author.36 Indeed, the first readers of The Omen seem to have taken it 
to be by any of the popular authors of the day except Galt. Caroline 
Bowles guessed it to be by Thomas De Quincey; James Hogg assumed 
the author was his friend R. P. Gillies;37 other guesses were Walter 
Scott, John Wilson, John Gibson Lockhart, and William Godwin.
D. M. Moir adds in his posthumous memoir of Galt that the tale was 
also attributed at the time to William Maginn, Thomas Hamilton, and 
Barry St Leger.38 When The Omen was first published, even Galt’s 
close friend Moir did not seem to be in on the secret. In February 1826, 
Moir sent a copy of the book to the writer Alexander Balfour with the 
comment, “The Omen you will find a beautifully written thing but a 
little unfortunate as to story. – I know not who is the author; but I 
believe he is resident in London.”39 A few months later, Moir wrote 
to Blackwood expressing surprise at learning (as he thought) that the 
unknown author was John Gibson Lockhart.40 While editing Galt’s 
manuscript The Last of the Lairds, Moir had come across a deliberately 
misleading attribution of The Omen to Lockhart that Galt planted in 
chapter 21 of Lairds. Although Moir believed the hint, he found the 
reference egregious and edited Lockhart’s name out of Lairds. It was 
not an uncommon occurrence for Moir or Blackwood to remove 
overly strident ad hominem allusions from Galt’s fiction manuscripts; 
apparently a shot against William Jerdan, the editor of the Literary 
Gazette toward whom both Blackwood and Galt harbored resentment, 
was also edited out of Lairds at this point.41 Nevertheless, a cryptic 
allusion to The Omen remains in the published version of The Last of 
the Lairds: the narrator describes “universal nature” in “euphonious 
phrases, imitated from the style of that mysterious little work, ‘the 
Omen’” and intimates that both the sentiment and the author of The 
Omen are Scottish.42
The first published review of The Omen, which appeared in the 
36 Galt to William Blackwood, 27 March 1826, MS 4017, NLS.
37 Caroline Bowles to William Blackwood, 25 February 1826, MS 4018, and 
James Hogg to William Blackwood, 19 March 1826, MS 4017, NLS.
38 “Biographical Memoir of the Author,” p. xxi.
39 D. M. Moir to Alexander Balfour, February 1826, Needler Papers, Thomas 
Fisher Rare Book Library, University of Toronto.
40 D. M. Moir to William Blackwood, [June–August 1826], MS 4018, NLS.
41 Galt to William Blackwood, 19 September 1826, MS 4017, NLS.
42 The Last of the Lairds: or, The Life and Opinions of Malachi Mailings, Esq. of 
Auldbiggings (Edinburgh: Blackwood and London: Cadell, 1826), pp. 183–4.
introduction
xxxv

­Literary Gazette on 25 February 1826, began by noticing that the 
­novel’s postscript “puzzles” the reviewer as to “whether the writer 
means the reader to take it gravely or as a jest,” a hoax of the kind 
to which Scottish writers in the Blackwood’s circle were especially 
prone. The Gazette then quotes long passages of evocative scenery 
and ­psychological description so as to let readers “form their own 
opinions upon the ­merits or demerits of the Omen.”43 A brief review 
in the New Times, a daily paper edited by John Stoddart, followed two 
days later; it consisted of a few sentences prefacing some extracts from 
The Omen. While it describes The Omen as “a series of beautifully con­
ceived, and beautifully executed scenes,” the New Times deems this 
kind of episodic character description to show much less genius than a 
well-constructed plot.44 Both these reviews are only mildly negative, yet 
Galt referred to them anxiously as “Jerdans strictures & Dr ­Stoddarts”45 
and continued to resent them bitterly, Jerdan’s in particular. A much 
longer and more devastating review that appeared in the April issue 
of Constable’s Edinburgh Magazine summarizes the entire story of The 
Omen and quotes long excerpts that obliterate any suspense. With a 
combination of sarcasm and condescension, this review critiques the 
subject as “unpleasant,” the style as “inflated and hyperbolical,” and 
the incidents as “highly improbable”; it questions the originality of 
the tale and ridicules the theme of premonitions entirely.46 It ends 
by attributing the novel to an unnamed Irish author – likely William 
Maginn or Barry St Leger, although the reviewer’s specific reference 
to “Belfast” might even point toward John Banim, who was in Belfast 
at the time. Another negative review came in the March issue of the 
Monthly Review. Summarizing the plot of the story briefly, this review 
criticizes its second half as being melodramatic and improbable, “in 
the very worst style of the German school,” and ­speculates that the 
novel is the “‘maiden’ production” of a Scottish author.47
Notwithstanding this discouraging initial reception, Galt remained 
so engaged with the mystical theme of The Omen that a month after 
its publication he began to write a kind of sequel, immediately taking 
43 The Literary Gazette, and Journal of Belles Lettres, Arts, Sciences, &c., 475 (25 
February 1826), pp. 116–18.
44 The New Times, 27 February 1826, p. 1.
45 Galt to William Blackwood, 2 March 1826, MS 4017, NLS.
46 The Edinburgh Magazine, and Literary Miscellany, n.s. 97 (January–June 
1826), pp. 433–45; here, pp. 435 and 445.
47 The Monthly Review, n.s. 1 (1826), pp. 335–6.
introduction
xxxvi

up a hint of Alexander Blackwood’s that “a tale for the [Blackwood’s] 
Magazine, by the author of the Omen would be of use.” Galt con­
ceived a story “full of mysticism & poetry” called “666 or ‘the number 
of the heart’” that would “extend to nearly 100 pages of such print as 
the Omen” and be published across three issues of Blackwood’s.48 He 
began to send the manuscript on 7 April 1826; William Blackwood had 
it typeset and returned partial proofs to Galt on 21 April.49 Despite this 
rapid and extensive progress, however, the story never seems to have 
achieved publication, and it has been lost.
Four months after The Omen’s publication, Walter Scott buoyed 
everyone’s spirits by providing a long, thoughtful, positive review that 
was published in the July 1826 issue of Blackwood’s. Scott praised “the 
beauty of its language, and the truth of the descriptions introduced.” 
The “main interest of the piece,” in his opinion, is the effective delinea­
tion of a troubled psyche and the resulting insights into the possible 
causes of apparitions and premonitions.50 Galt remained proud of the 
attention the book had received from his illustrious contemporary 
(who was initially under the impression, however, that The Omen was 
by his own son-in-law Lockhart).51 In his Literary Life, Galt recalls that 
he found Scott’s review “greatly gratifying” – not only because of the 
“commendable degree of approbation” expressed in it, but also because 
Scott apparently took the story to be more true-to-life than it actually 
was; according to Galt, Scott’s review included “facts stated corrobora­
tive of incidents that were pure metaphysical inventions.”52
In a letter of 22 August 1826, William Blackwood raised with 
Galt the possibility of a new edition of The Omen, this time with the 
attribution “by the Author of the Ayrshire Legatees,”53 to which Galt 
replied: “I agree with you that the device proposed for a second edi­
tion of the Omen should be tried. I would make a little change of a 
48 Galt to William Blackwood, 27 March 1826, and a subsequent undated let­
ter, MS 4017, NLS.
49 William Blackwood to Galt, 21 April 1826, MS 30309, NLS.
50 Blackwood’s Edinburgh Magazine, 20 (July–December 1826), pp. 52–9; here, 
p. 57.
51 In his journal entry for 23 February 1826, Scott wrote: “Read a little volume 
called the omen very well written, deep and powerfull language. Aut Erasmus 
aut Diabolus—it is Lockhart or I am strangely deceived” (The Journal of Sir 
Walter Scott, ed. W. E. K. Anderson [Oxford: Clarendon, 1972], p. 97).
52 Literary Life, I, p. 270.
53 William Blackwood to Galt, 22 August 1826, MS 30309, NLS.
introduction
xxxvii

page or two in the last sheet, or rather restore what was injudiciously 
omitted.”54 There is no indication of what Galt would have changed, 
what was omitted and by whom, and whether he refers to the story 
itself or to the postscript. In any case, no further edition of The Omen 
in English materialized during Galt’s lifetime, although a few trans­
lations appeared during the early 1830s. A Russian version entitled 
Предзнаменование (Predznamenovanie), translated by G. Pasynkov, 
was published in St. Petersburg in 1831 – albeit with the subtitle “A 
story by Walter Scott” (повесть Вальтер-Скотта, Povest’ Valter-
Skotta). A Danish translation entitled Varselstegnet by Hans Christian 
Wosemose appeared in six instalments in a Copenhagen periodical in 
June and July 1832; it was based on a German translation by Johann 
August Diezmann that has not been traced.
Unlike the other two short novels in the present volume, The Omen 
suited the taste of Victorian readers and was occasionally republished 
in the later nineteenth century. Within a few years of Galt’s death in 
1839, The Omen appeared twice in different collections of short prose. 
First, in 1842, it was included in volume 4 of the original series of 
Blackwood’s Standard Novels, four volumes of which were devoted to 
Galt’s work. This version, which was edited by Galt’s literary executor 
D. M. Moir, completely omits The Omen’s postscript, thus reducing the 
complexity of the tale by removing the skeptical voice of the ­editor “B. 
A. M.” The postscript did appear in an American republication of The 
Omen as part of a compendium of six short novels by British authors 
entitled The Omnibus of Modern Romance. Despite the inclusion of the 
ironic postscript, however, the tone of this reprint was significantly 
altered by the addition of a subtitle that reads: “The Omen: A Tale 
of Real Life. By John Galt.” In place of Galt’s original epigraph from 
Shakespeare, a couple of sentences from Scott’s review serve as a 
headnote to the story in order to substantiate its supposed truth: “The 
real merits of the work consists [sic] in the beauty of its language and 
the truth of the descriptions introduced. Yet even these are kept in 
subordination to the main interest of the piece. This remarkable story 
we have every reason to believe accurate matter of fact, at least in its 
general ­bearings.”55 The Omen was republished once more (with the 
54 Galt to William Blackwood, 6 September 1826, MS 4017, NLS.
55 The Omnibus of Modern Romance (New York: James Mowatt, 1844), vol. 
I, no. 2, p. 145. The Omnibus was to appear twice a month, providing cheap 
reprints of modern British and European romance novels; four issues are 
extant, all from 1844.
introduction
xxxviii

postscript) by Publication Studio Guelph in 2013, edited by David J. 
Knight, who includes Scott’s review from Blackwood’s and the anony­
mous Edinburgh Magazine review as appendices.
*        *        *
From the domestic comedy of Glenfell to the complex irony of 
Andrew of Padua to the meditative tragedy of The Omen, the three 
stories collected in the present volume show Galt writing tales of a 
length to which he naturally inclined. Diverse as they are, there are 
some ­revealing continuities between them, such as Galt’s continuing 
engagement with drama and theatre. He originally wrote Glenfell in the 
form of a play; Andrew of Padua centres on the protagonist’s ­theatrical 
career; and a crucial recognition scene in The Omen takes place at a 
performance of Shakespeare’s Hamlet. The comedy of ­Glenfell merges 
in Andrew of Padua with a kind of metafictional irony that persists 
even in the melancholy Omen, where Galt cannot resist adding a 
hoaxing postscript despite the serious tone of the story. While finan­
cial exigency may have been a major factor in Galt’s writing of all three 
works, they are more innovative and complex than might be expected 
from simple hack-work. Instead, they demonstrate Galt’s creativity, 
his ­willingness to experiment, and his determination to improvise a 
place for himself in the volatile literary market of the 1820s.
introduction
xxxix 